1️⃣ What is Ansible?

Ansible is an open-source IT automation tool.

It is used to configure systems, deploy applications, and manage IT infrastructure automatically.

Written in Python, it uses a declarative language (YAML) for describing automation tasks.

2️⃣ Key Features
Feature	Explanation
Agentless	No software needs to be installed on target machines; uses SSH for Linux or WinRM for Windows.
Simple Language	Uses YAML in the form of Playbooks; easy to read and write.
Idempotent	Running the same task multiple times does not change the system if it’s already configured correctly.
Extensible	Supports modules for cloud, network, databases, Docker, etc.
Orchestration	Can coordinate multi-step processes across multiple servers.
Integration	Works well with CI/CD pipelines, Docker, Kubernetes, and monitoring tools.
3️⃣ Components of Ansible

Control Node – The machine where Ansible is installed and commands are executed.

Managed Nodes – The servers or machines Ansible manages.

Inventory File – Lists all the managed nodes.

Modules – Units of work (like installing a package, copying files, or restarting a service).

Playbooks – YAML files defining tasks and configurations.

Roles – Organize Playbooks into reusable components.

4️⃣ Advantages of Ansible

No Agents Required: Easier to maintain.

Simple to Learn: Human-readable YAML files.

Automation: Reduces manual errors and repetitive tasks.

Scalable: Can manage a few servers or thousands.

Open Source & Free: With a strong community and plenty of modules.

5️⃣ Example Use Cases

Deploy applications to servers automatically.

Configure servers with packages, users, or settings.

Manage Docker containers and Kubernetes clusters.

Automate CI/CD workflows with Jenkins.

Set up monitoring tools like Grafana or Prometheus.

Simple Example: Installing Nginx on a server

Inventory file (hosts)

webservers:
  192.168.1.10


Playbook (install-nginx.yml)

- hosts: webservers
  become: yes
  tasks:
    - name: Install Nginx
      apt:
        name: nginx
        state: present


Run with:

ansible-playbook -i hosts install-nginx.yml


This will install Nginx on all servers listed under webservers.
